---
title: Twerking the lerp
author: leandro
date: 2023-06-10 08:40:00 +0800
categories: [Gamedev, Math, Programming]
tags: [Easing, Animation]
math: true

image:
  path: /assets/img/posts/easing/cover.gif
---

When it comes to bringing animations to life, smooth and visually captivating transitions are the key to creating an immersive experience. Luckily, there's a powerful technique that can help us achieve exactly that: **easing functions**. They allow us to control the acceleration and deceleration of animations, resulting in stunning and natural-looking motion. With them we can move, rotate, and scale elements, changing their opacity, color, and even blurriness.

> Also named as **Tweening**, **Animation Curves** or **Easing Functions**, these techniques provide a way to control the interpolation or transition between values in animations.
{: .prompt-info }


## What is an easing function?
Easing functions are mathematical equations that define the rate of change of a value over time. In other terms, they control the speed of an animation from its start to its end, from $$ a $$ to $$ b $$ in $$ t $$ given time. $$ t $$ is a decimal number (usually between `0` and `1`) that represents the percentage of the animation that has been completed.

Mathematically, the equation can be broken down as follows:

```csharp
/// <summary>
/// Linear interpolation (lerp) between two values. Unclamped.
/// </summary>
/// <param name="a">Start value</param>
/// <param name="b">End value</param>
/// <param name="t">Time</param>
/// <returns>Interpolated value</returns>
float Lerp(float a, float b, float t) => a + ( b - a ) * t;
```

> Unity's [`Mathf.Lerp()`](https://github.com/Unity-Technologies/UnityCsReference/blob/master/Runtime/Export/Math/Mathf.cs#L222) is already clamped, so it's not the same as the above formula.
{: .prompt-warning }

- $$ ( b - a ) $$: Determines the "distance" or change between the values you are interpolating.

- $$ ( b - a ) * t $$: Multiplying the difference by $$ t $$ scales the change. As it varies usually from `0` to `1`, this expression will determine how far along the interpolation you are. 
If $$ t $$ is `0`, the result will be $$ a $$, if $$ t $$ is `1`, the result will be $$ b $$, and if $$ t $$ is `0.5`, the result will be $$ \frac{a + b}{2} $$ (halfway between $$ a $$ and $$ b $$).

- $$ a + ( b - a ) * t $$: Finally, adding the scaled difference to the initial value $$ a $$ gives you the interpolated value based on the parameter $$ t $$.

If we visualize the values on a Cartesian plane, we can imagine that the $$ t $$ parameter represents the `x axis`, and the result of the equation represents the `y axis`:

<iframe src="https://www.desmos.com/calculator/gje0gmsvkn" width="85%" height="620vh" style="border: 1px solid #ccc overflow: hidden; margin: 0 auto; display: block;" class="shadow rounded-10" frameborder="0" title="Easing functions"></iframe>

You can see that the output (Y's axis) is a straight line, that goes from `0` to `1` constantly. The name is self-explanatory, it's a <b>Linear interpolation</b>.

## Only linear?
If you take a look at the previous graph, you will notice that the line is ~linear~. This is because the `t` parameter is not changing over time, it is always the same. But imagine this approach in a rocket launch, for an example. The rocket would always move at the same speed, which is not realistic at all!


### Ease in
So it's time to do some little math changes to shine the movment look. We want the rockect to gain speed over time, so we need to change the `t` parameter. To achieve this, we can use an **ease in** function, a mathematical function, that **~starts slow and ends fast~**.

The ease in quadratic function is the simpliest ease in equation.
It's defined as $$ f(t) = t^2 $$:

```csharp
float InQuad(float t) => t * t;

float t = elapsed_time / duration;
object.position.y = Lerp( 0, 1, InQuad( t ) );
```

> Avoid using the [`Mathf.Pow()`](https://github.com/Unity-Technologies/UnityCsReference/blob/master/Runtime/Export/Math/Mathf.cs#L128) function, or similar ones. It may not be optimized for your platform.
{: .prompt-warning }

Let's see some other function examples:

- **In Sine**: $$ \sin(\frac{\pi}{2}t) $$
- **In Quad**: $$ t^2 $$
- **In Cubic**: $$ t^3 $$
- **In Quart**: $$ t^4 $$
- **In Quint**: $$ t^5 $$
- **In Expo**: $$ 2^{10(t-1)} $$
- **In Circ**: $$ 1 - \sqrt{1 - t^2} $$
- **In Back**: $$ t^2(2.70158t - 1.70158) $$
- **In Elastic**: $$ 2^{10(t-1)} * \sin(13\pi t) $$
- **In Bounce**: $$ 1 - \cos(\frac{\pi}{2}t) $$

> You can also test by yourself the different easing functions in the previous graph.
{: .prompt-info }

### Flip
Flipping an easing function reverses its progression, creating an opposite direction effect. Mathematically, to flip a linear easing function $$ y = x $$, subtract the input value `x` from 1: $$ y = 1 - x $$.

```csharp
float Flip(float t) => 1 - t;
```

### Ease out
For a rocket landing, we want the rocket to start fast and end slow. To achieve this, we can use flip the quadratic function. With that, we just discovered the **ease out** function, that **starts fast and ends slow**.

After applying it to a quadratic function, we get: $$ f(t) = (1 - t)^2 $$.

However, we need it to start at `0` and end at `1`, so we need to flip it again, resulting in a proper **ease out** function: $$ f(t) = 1 - (1 - t)^2 $$

```csharp
float OutQuad(float t) => Flip( InQuad( Flip( t ) ) );
```

Some **ease out** function examples:
- **Out Sine**: $$ \sin(\frac{\pi}{2}t) $$
- **Out Quad**: $$ 1 - (1 - t)^2 $$
- **Out Cubic**: $$ 1 - (1 - t)^3 $$
- **Out Quart**: $$ 1 - (1 - t)^4 $$
- **Out Quint**: $$ 1 - (1 - t)^5 $$
- **Out Expo**: $$ 1 - 2^{-10t} $$
- **Out Circ**: $$ \sqrt{1 - (t - 1)^2} $$
- **Out Back**: $$ 1 - (1 - t)^2(2.70158(1 - t) - 1.70158) $$
- **Out Elastic**: $$ 1 - 2^{-10t} \sin(13\pi(2t - 0.5)) $$
- **Out Bounce**: $$ \cos(\frac{\pi}{2}t) $$

### Ease in out
If we want to combine both effects, we can use the **ease in out** function, that merges the **ease in** and **ease out** functions.

```csharp
float InOutQuad(float t) => t < 0.5F
                            ? InQuad( t ) * 2
                            : Flip( InQuad( -2 * t + 2 ) ) / 2;
```

Alternatively, we can lerp between the **ease in** and **ease out** functions.

```csharp
float InOutQuad(float t) => Lerp( InQuad( t ), OutQuad( t ), t );
```

## Enhancing the lerp technique
But what if we want a function that can express a lot of different movements in a easy way? We can use a **cubic polynomial**[^cubic]!

To achieve this, we need to ensure that the function **always** starts at `0` and ends at `1`.

Here are the steps to define the function:

- Start with the initial function: $$ f(t) = at^3 + bt^2 + ct + d $$
- We want the graph to start at `0`, so we set $$ f(0) = 0 $$:

$$
  \eqalign{
  f(0) & = a(0)^3 + b(0)^2 + c(0) + d \\
  f(0) & = 0 + 0 + 0 + d \\
  d & = 0
  }
$$

- The updated function becomes:
$$ f(t) = at^3 + bt^2 + ct $$

- We want the graph to end at `1`, so we set $$ f(1) = 1 $$:

$$
  \begin{aligned}
  f(1) & = a(1)^3 + b(1)^2 + c(1) \\
  f(1) & = a + b + c \\
  1 & = a + b + c
  \end{aligned}
$$

- Since $$ f(1) $$ should equal `1`, we have: $$ c = 1 - a - b $$

- We can rewrite $$ c $$ as $$ (1 - a - b) $$ and substitute it back into the function:

$$ f(t) = at^3 + bt^2 + (1 - a - b)t $$

Now, the function $$ f(t) = at^3 + bt^2 + (1 - a - b)t $$ satisfies the conditions of starting at (0,0) and ending at (1,1) for any given values of $$ a $$ and $$ b $$.

That's it! We can now pass any values of $$ a $$ and $$ b $$ to the function to create different easing effects:

- **Linear**: we can set $$ a $$ and $$ b $$ to `0`.
- **In Back**: we can set $$ a $$ as `1.5` and $$ b $$ as `0`.
- **Out Back**: we can set $$ a $$ as `1.25` and $$ b $$ as `-4`.

```csharp
float Custom(float t, float a, float b)
{
  float c = 1 - a - b;
  return ( a * t * t * t ) + ( b * t * t ) + ( c * t );
}
```

> Try to play with the values in this [Desmos graph](https://www.desmos.com/calculator/qir47lza31).
{: .prompt-info }

## Embrace the Easing Frontier
Is that it? Not even close! There are new approaches you can test by yourself!

In case you’re interested in additional resources on the topic of easing, I recommend checking out the content by [Freya Holmér]. I personally used her material to study and incorporate some of the content in this post:
{% include embed/youtube.html id='-Ii3MrJFBkQ' %}

Now you have some knowledge to create your own easing functions. Experiment with blending various functions and watch as your animations spring to life in unexpected ways.

But wait, there's more! Have you heard about [Splines](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spline_(mathematics)) and [Bezier Curves](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/B%C3%A9zier_curve)? They’re definitely worth a look!

May you live long and animate with great success!

[//]: (Externals)
[^cubic]: Cubic equation. Available in: <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cubic_equation>.
[Freya Holmér]: https://cat.gay
[//]: (EOF)